Can a helpful, well-meaning tool still be racist?
That's the trap of technological benevolence.
We usually assume that without explicit, hate-filled intent, a new machine is completely neutral.
But take the police throwbot, a throwable surveillance machine designed to keep tactical teams safe.
Pitched purely for public safety, it lets officers survey dangerous real estate with their eyes,
not their bodies. But this do-gooding ethos acts as a moral cover.
It shields the tool from scrutiny as it's dropped into an unjust, deeply unequal system.
Here, marginalized populations are routinely denigrated,
and black victims are already treated as disposable.
So the genuine intent to protect officers ends up expanding surveillance against vulnerable
communities. Because a racist system doesn't need hate-filled programmers,
it just needs detached designers prioritizing benevolent aims,
while their shiny new tools codify historical neglect.
So while that individual throwbot might successfully protect a single tactical officer
from physical harm during a standoff, that exact same technology ultimately
arms and enforces a fundamentally unequal system of surveillance across the entire city.